= RISC-V Vector Element Groups
:le: &#8804;

*Concept - not part of any standard*


Some vector instructions treat operands as a vector of one or more
_element_ _groups_, where each element group is a fixed number of
elements.  For example, complex numbers can be viewed as a two-element
group (one real element and one imaginary element).  As another
example, the SHA-256 cryptographic instructions operate on 128-bit
values represented as a 4-element group of 32-bit elements.

This section describes recommendations and terminology for generic
instruction set design for vector instructions that operate on element
groups.

NOTE: Element groups effectively replace the EDIV concept that was
discussed before ratification of the vector spec, but removed from the
ratified spec.  Element groups are more flexible, supporting a wider
range of group sizes, and avoid having to increase supported SEW for
larger groups.

== Element Group Size

The _element_ _group_ _size_ (EGS) is the number of elements in one
group, and must be a power-of-two (POT).

NOTE: Support for non-POT EGS was considered but causes many practical
complications and so has been dropped.  Error checking for `vl` is a
little more difficult.  For LMUL>1, non-POT EGSs will result in groups
straddling the individual vector registers in a vector register
group. Non-POT EGS can also cause large increases in the
lowest-common-multiple of element group sizes, which adds constraints
to `vl` setting in order to avoid splitting an element group across
stripmine iterations in vector-length-agnostic code.

The element group size is statically encoded in the instruction, often
implicitly as part of the opcode.

NOTE: The vector instructions in the base V vector ISA can be viewed
as all having an element group size of 1 for all operands statically
encoded in the instruction.

NOTE: Many operations only make sense with a certain number of
elements per group (e.g., complex operations require a element group
size of 2 and SHA-256 requires an element group size of 4).

NOTE: Possible future vector instructions that might operate on
variable-sized element groups are not considered here.

== Setting `vl`

Each source and destination operand to a vector instruction might be
defined as either a single element group or a vector of element
groups.  When an operand is a vector of element groups, the `vl`
setting must correspond to an integer multiple of the element group
size, with other values of `vl` raising an illegal instruction
exception.

NOTE: More complex vector instructions could potentially have
different non-unit vector lengths for different operands, but these
are not considered here.

NOTE: For example, a SHA-256 instruction would require that `vl` is a
multiple of 4.

When element group instructions are present, an additional constraint
is placed on the setting of `vl` based on an AVL value (Section 6.3 of
vector spec 1.0).  EGSMAX is the largest EGS supported by the
implementation.  When AVL > VLMAX, the value of `vl` must be set to
either VLMAX or a positive integer multiple of EGSMAX.

NOTE: As the base vector extension only has element group size of 1,
this constraint is backwards-compatible.

NOTE: This constraint prevents element groups being broken across
stripmining iterations in vector-length-agnostic code when a
VLMAX-size vector would otherwise be able to accomodate a whole number
of element groups.

NOTE: When the SEW and LMUL settings cause VLMAX to be smaller than
EGSMAX on a certain machine, then `vl` is set to VLMAX.  If an
attempt is made to execute an element-group instruction with
EGS > `vl`=VLMAX, an illegal instruction exception will be raised on that
instruction.  Other element-group instructions with EGS {le} `vl`=VLMAX will
proceed.

NOTE: If EEW is encoded statically in the instruction, or if an
instruction has multiple operands containing vectors of element groups
with different EEW an appropriate SEW must be chosen for `vsetvl`
instructions.

NOTE: Additional constraints may be required for some element group
instructions to ensure legal length values for all operands.

== Determining EEW 

The `vtype` SEW can be used to indicate or calculate the effective
element size (EEW) of one or more operands of an element group
instruction.  Where the operand is an element group, SEW and EEW refer
to the number of bits in each individual element within a group not
the number of bits in the group as a whole.

Alternatively, the opcode might encode EEW of all operands statically
and ignore the value of SEW when the operation only makes sense for a
single size on each operand.

NOTE: Many operations are only defined for one EEW, e.g., SHA-256
requires EEW=32.  Encoding EEWs statically in the instruction removes
a dynamic dependency on the SEW value and the need to check for errors
in SEW values.  However, ignoring SEW also prevents reuse of the
static opcode with a different dynamic SEW, and in many cases, the SEW
setting will be needed for regular vector instructions used to process
the individual elements in the vector.

== Determining EMUL

The `vtype` LMUL setting can be used to indicate or calculate the
effective length multiplier (EMUL) for one or more operands.  Element
group instructions tend to exhibit a much wider range of relationships
between various operand EEW/EMUL values.  For example, an instruction
might take a vector of length N of 4-element groups with EEW=8b and
reduce each group to produce a vector length N of 1-element groups
with EEW=32b. In this case, the input and output EMUL values are equal
even though the EEW settings differ by a factor of 4.

Each source and destination operand to a vector instruction may have a
different element group size, different EMUL, and/or different EEW.

== Element Group Width

The _element_ _group_ _width_ (EGW) is the number of bits in the
element group as a whole.  For example, the proposed SHA-256
instructions operate on an EGW of 128, with EGS=4 and EEW=32.  It is
possible to use LMUL to concatenate multiple vector registers together
to support larger EGW>VLEN.

NOTE: Implementations may choose not to support instructions with
EGW>VLEN due to implementation complexity.

NOTE: If software using large EGW instructions wants to be portable
across a range of implementations, some of which may have VLEN<EGW and
hence require LMUL>1, then software can only use a subset of the
architectural registers.  Profiles can set minimum VLEN requirements
to inform authors of portable software.

NOTE: Element group operations by their nature will gather data from
across a wider portion of a vector datapath than regular vector
instructions.  Some element group instructions might allow temporal
execution of individual element operations in a larger group, while
others will require all EGW bits of a group to be presented to a
functional unit at the same time.

== Masking

Some element-group instructions might not support masking.  Some
element-group instructions might support element-level masking.  Other
instructions might define mask behavior in terms of a _mask_ _element_
_group_ (e.g., update destination element group if any or all mask
bits in mask element group are set, and/or update one or more
destination mask values in a mask element group on basis of element
group predicate).
